---
title: Cyclic Group
date: 2026-03-18 00:00:01
categories: [Mathematics, Abstract Algebra]
tags: []
math: true
---

## Theorem 1
Let $G$ be a group, and let $a \in G$. Then the set

$$
\langle a \rangle = \{ a^n \mid n \in \mathbb{Z} \}
$$

is a subgroup of $G$.

### Proof
Clearly $\langle a \rangle$ is a nonempty subset of $G$. Let $x, y \in \langle a \rangle$. Then $x = a^m$ and $y = a^n$ for some $m, n \in \mathbb{Z}$. Note that $y^{-1} = (a^n)^{-1} = (a^{-1})^n = a^{-n} \in \langle a \rangle$. Thus

$$xy^{-1} = a^m a^{-n} = a^{m-n} \in \langle a \rangle,$$

and therefore $\langle a \rangle \le G$. $\blacksquare$

---

## Remark
$\langle a \rangle$ is the smallest subgroup of $G$ containing $a$.

$(\because)$ Let $H \le G$ such that $a \in H$. Then $a^n \in H, \forall n \in \mathbb{Z}$. Thus $\langle a \rangle \subseteq H$. $\blacksquare$

---

## Definition
Let $G$ be a group, and let $a \in G$.

**(i)** $\langle a \rangle$ is called ***the cyclic subgroup generated by*** $a$.

**(ii)** $G$ is called ***a cyclic group*** if $G = \langle a \rangle$ for some $a \in G$.

**(iii)** If $G$ is a cyclic group, then $a$ is called ***a generator*** of $G$.

---

## Example
**(i)** $\mathbb{Z}_4 = \langle 1 \rangle = \langle 3 \rangle$

**(ii)** $\mathbb{Z}_n = \langle 1 \rangle, \forall n \ge 2$.

**(iii)** Let $V$ be the Klein 4-group. Then $a^2 = e, \forall a \in V$, so $V$ is not cyclic.

**(iv)** Let $n \in \mathbb{Z}$. Then $\langle n \rangle = n\mathbb{Z}$ is a cyclic subgroup of $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$.

---

## Remark 1

$2$보다 큰 정수 $n$에 대해서 $\mathbb{Z}_n$의 생성원 중 $n$보다 작은 생성원 $m$은 몇 개나 있을까? 우선 Example (ii)에 의해서 $1$은 항상 생성원임을 알 수 있다. 이 말인즉슨 $1$이 순환군의 원소이면 항상 $\mathbb{Z}_n$을 생성해 낼 수 있다는 뜻이다. 즉 $m$의 적당한 정수배를 $n$으로 나눈 나머지가 $1$이 되면 $\langle m \rangle$에 $1$이 포함되고 $\mathbb{Z}_n$을 생성해 낼 수 있다. 즉 다음의 조건을 만족해야 한다.

$$ \begin{gather*}
km \equiv 1 \quad \text{mod } n \quad \text{for some } k \in \mathbb{Z} \\
\iff km - \ell n = 1 \quad \text{for some } k, \ell \in \mathbb{Z}
\end{gather*}$$

이때 $\gcd(m, n) = d > 1$이라고 가정하면 $m = ad, n = bd$를 만족하는 정수 $a, b$가 존재한다. 따라서 

$$km - \ell n = kad - \ell bd = (ka - \ell b)d = 1$$

이 성립해야 하는데 $d > 1$이고 $ka - \ell b$ 또한 정수이므로 모순이고, 즉 $\gcd(m, n) = 1$이다. 따라서 순환군 $\langle m \rangle$에 원소 $1$을 포함해서 $\mathbb{Z}_n$의 생성원이 되는 $n$보다 작은 자연수 $m$은 $n$과 서로소인 자연수만큼, 즉 $\phi(n)$개 존재한다. 

---

## Theorem 2
Every cyclic group is abelian. 

### Proof
Let $G$ be a cyclic group, which means that $G$ is a group and $G = \langle a \rangle$ for some $a \in G$.

Let $x, y \in G$. Then $x = a^n$ and $y = a^m$ for some $n, m \in \mathbb{Z}$. Thus we have

$$\begin{align*}
    xy &= a^na^m \\
    &= a^{n + m} \\
    &= a^{m + n} \\
    &= a^m a^n \\
    &= yx,
\end{align*}$$ 

which means that $G$ is abelian. $\blacksquare$

---

## Theorem 3
A subgroup of a cyclic group is cyclic. 

### Proof
Let $G$ be a cyclic group, which means that $G$ is a group and $G = \langle a \rangle$ for some $a \in G$. Let $H \le G$, and let $e$ denote the identity of $G$.

If $H = \\{ e \\}$, then clearly $H = \langle e \rangle$.

Suppose that $H \neq \\{ e \\}$, that is, some element $a(\neq e)$ of $G$ belongs to $H$. Note that the set $\\{ n \in \mathbb{N} \mid a^n \in H \\}$ is a nonemtpy subset of $\mathbb{N}$, so by the Well-Ordering Principle, there exists a smallest positive integer $m$ such that $a^m \in H$. We claim that $H = \langle a^m \rangle$.

We claim that $H = \langle a^m \rangle$.
$(\because)$ Clearly $\langle a^m \rangle \subset H$ since $a^m \in H$ and $H$ is a group. Let $x \in H$. Since $x \in G$, $x = a^n \in H$ for some $n \in \mathbb{Z}$. By the Division Algorithm, there exist integers $q$ and $r$ such that $n = mq + r$ and $0 \le r < m$. Thus we have

$$\begin{gather*}
a^n = a^{mq + r} = (a^m)^q a^r \\
\implies a^r = ((a^m)^q)^{-1} a^n.
\end{gather*}$$

Since $a^n \in H$ and $(a^m)^q \in H$, so that its inverse is also in $H$, we have $a^r \in H$. If $r > 0$, then $a^r \in H$ and $r < m$, which contradicts the definition of $m$. Thus $r = 0$. Thus, $a^n = (a^m)^q \in \langle a^m \rangle$, which means that $H \subset \langle a^m \rangle$. Hence $H = \langle a^m \rangle$. $\blacksquare$

---

## Corollary
The subgroups of $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$ are precisely of the forms $n\mathbb{Z}$ for some $n \in \mathbb{Z}$.

### Proof
Let $H \le (\mathbb{Z}, +)$. Since $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$ is cyclic, by Theorem 3, $H$ is cyclic. Thus $H = \langle n \rangle$ for some $n \in \mathbb{Z}$. Note that $\langle n \rangle = \\{mn \mid m \in \mathbb{Z} \\} = n\mathbb{Z}$. Hence $H = n\mathbb{Z}$. $\blacksquare$

---

## Remark 2
An abelian group need not be cyclic. For example, the Klein 4-group $V$ is abelian but not cyclic.