---
title: Group
date: 2026-03-11
categories: [Mathematics, Abstract Algebra]
tags: []
math: true
---

## Definition
A ***group*** $(G, \ast)$ is a binary algebraic structure such that the followings are satisfied:

**(i)** $(a \ast b) \ast c = a \ast (b \ast c), \forall a, b, c \in G$.

**(ii)** $\exists e \in G$ such that $e \ast a = a \ast e = a, \forall a \in G$.

**(iii)** $\forall a \in G$, $\exists b \in G$ such that $a \ast b = e = b \ast a$.

---

## Remark
정수군 $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$에서 정의된 일차방정식 $5 + x = 2$은 군의 정의에 의해 다음과 같이 풀 수 있다.

$$\begin{align*}
5 + x &= 2 \\
-5 + (5 + x) &= -5 + 2 \\
(-5 + 5) + x &= -3 \quad \text{(associativity)} \\
0 + x & = -3 \quad \text{(inverse)} \\
x &= -3 \quad \text{(identity)}
\end{align*}$$

마찬가지로 유리수군 $(\mathbb{Q}, \cdot)$에서 정의된 일차방정식 $2 \cdot x = 3$은 다음과 같이 풀 수 있다.

$$\begin{align*}
2 \cdot x &= 3 \\
\frac{1}{2} \cdot (2 \cdot x) &= \frac{1}{2} \cdot 3 \\
\left(\frac{1}{2} \cdot 2\right) \cdot x &= \frac{3}{2} \quad \text{(associativity)} \\
1 \cdot x &= \frac{3}{2} \quad \text{(inverse)} \\
x &= \frac{3}{2} \quad \text{(identity)}
\end{align*}$$

이와 같이 일차방정식을 풀려면 위와 같은 세 가지 조건, 즉 결합성과 항등원, 역원의 존재성이 필요하고 이 조건만을 가지고 있는 대수적 구조가 군이라고 할 수 있다. 

---

## Examples

**(i)** $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$ is a group, but $(\mathbb{Z}, \cdot)$ is not a group.

**(ii)** $(\mathbb{Z}^+, +)$ is not a group because it does not have an identity element.

**(iii)** $(\mathbb{Q}^{\ast}, \cdot)$ and $(\mathbb{R}^{\ast}, \cdot)$ are groups.

**(iv)** Any vector space is an abelian group under addition. 

**(v)** $(\mathbb{R}^{n \times n}, \cdot)$ is not a group under matrix multiplication because it the zero matrix does not have an inverse.

---

## Cancellation Law
Let $(G, \ast)$ be a group. Then ***the left and right cancellation laws*** hold:

**(i)** $a \ast b = a \ast c \implies b = c, \forall a, b, c \in G$.

**(ii)** $b \ast a = c \ast a \implies b = c, \forall a, b, c \in G$.

### Proof
Let $g$ be the inverse of $a$. Then we have 

$$\begin{align*}
b &= e \ast b = (g \ast a) \ast b \\
&= g \ast (a \ast b) \\
&= g \ast (a \ast c) \\
&= (g \ast a) \ast c \\
&= e \ast c \\
&= c. \blacksquare
\end{align*}$$

---

## Theorem
Let $(G, \ast)$ be a group, and let $a, b \in G$. Then $\exists ! x, y \in G$ such that 

$$a \ast x = b \quad \text{and} \quad y \ast a = b.$$

### Proof
Let $g$ be the inverse of $a$. If we let $x = g \ast b$, then

$$\begin{align*}
a \ast x &= a \ast (g \ast b) \\
&= (a \ast g) \ast b \\
&= e \ast b \\
&= b,
\end{align*}$$

so that $x = g \ast b$ is a solution to $a \ast x = b$. 

Suppose that $x_1$ and $x_2$ are solutions to $a \ast x = b$. Then we have 

$$\begin{align*}
a \ast x_1 = b = a \ast x_2 \\ 
\implies x_1 = x_2
\end{align*}$$

by the cancellation law. Thus there uniquely exists $x \in G$ such that $a \ast x = b$. $\blacksquare$