---
title: "$T_1$ Space"
date: 2026-04-23
categories: [Mathematics, Topology]
tags: []
math: true
---

## Definition
Let $(X, \mathcal{T})$ be a topological space, and let $x, y \in X$ with $x \neq y$. Then $X$ is called a ***$T_1$-space*** if $\exists U, V \in \mathcal{T}$ such that $x \in U, y \notin U$ and $y \in V, x \notin V$.

---

## Theorem 1
$X$ is a $T_1$-space $\iff$ Every finite subset of $X$ is closed.

### Proof
$(\Longrightarrow)$

Suppose that $X$ is a $T_1$-space. Let $x \in X$ and $y \in X$ with $y \neq x$. Then there exist open sets $U, V$ of $X$ such that $x \in U, y \notin U$ and $y \in V, x \notin V$. Note that $V$ is a neighborhood of $y$. Since $V \cap \\{ x \\} = \emptyset$, we have that $\\{ x \\} \cap (V - \\{ y \\}) = \emptyset$, which means that $y \notin \overline{\\{ x \\}}$. Thus, we have that $y \notin \overline{\\{x\\}}, \forall y \in X - \\{ x \\}$, which implies that $\overline{\\{ x\\}} = \\{x\\}$. Therefore, $\\{x\\}$ is closed in $X$ for all $x \in X$. Hence, every finite set of $X$ is closed. 

$(\Longleftarrow)$

Suppose that every finite subset of $X$ is closed. Let $x, y \in X$ with $x \neq y$. Since $\\{x \\}$ and $\\{ y\\}$ are closed, $X - \\{ x\\}$ and $X - \\{ y\\}$ are open, and $y \notin X - \\{ y \\}$, $x \notin X - \\{x\\}$. Thus $X$ is a $T_1$-space. $\blacksquare$

---

## Theorem 2
Let $X$ be a $T_1$-space, and let $A \subset X$. Then $x \in A'$ $\iff$ every neighborhood of $x$ contains infinitely many points of $A$.

### Proof
$(\Longrightarrow)$

Let $x \in A'$. Then for any neighborhood $U$ of $x$, we have $A \cap (U - \\{x\\}) \neq \emptyset$. Suppose that there is some neighborhood $U$ of $x$ such that $U \cap A$ is finite. Then $U \cap (A - \\{ x \\})$ is also finite, and we denote $U \cap (A - \\{ x \\}) = \\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}$. 

Since $X$ is a $T_1$ space, $\\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}$ is closed in $X$, so that $X - \\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}$ is open in $X$. Then $U \cap (X - \\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}) = U - \\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}$ is also open in $X$. Since $x \notin U \cap (A - \\{ x \\}) = \\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}$, we have that $x \in U - \\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}$, which means that $U - \\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}$ is a neighborhood of $x$.

Then 

$$(U - \\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}) \cap (A - \\{ x \\}) \neq \emptyset$$

by assumption. But $U \cap (A - \\{ x \\}) = \\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}$, so that

$$(U - \\{ x_1, ..., x_n \\}) \cap (A - \\{ x \\}) = \emptyset. \bigotimes$$

Thus, every neighborhood of $x$ contains infinitely many points of $A$. 

$(\Longleftarrow)$

Let $U$ be a neighborhood of $x$. Then $U$ contains infinitely many points of $A$. Then $A \cap (U - \\{ x \\})$ also contains infinitely many points of $A$, which means that it is not empty. Thus $x \in A'$. $\blacksquare$