---
title: "Product Topology"
date: 2026-04-01
categories: [Mathematics, Topology]
math: true
---

## Theorem 1
Let $(X, \mathcal{T})$ and $(Y, \mathcal{T}')$ be topological spaces. 

**(i)** The collection 

$$\mathcal{B} = \{ U \times V \mid U \in \mathcal{T}, V \in \mathcal{T}' \}$$

of subsets of $X \times Y$ is a basis on $X \times Y$. The topology generated by $\mathcal{B}$ is called the ***product topology*** on $X \times Y$.

**(ii)** If $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis for $\mathcal{T}$ and $\mathcal{C}$ is a basis for $\mathcal{T}'$, then 

$$\mathcal{D} = \{ B \times C \mid B \in \mathcal{B}, C \in \mathcal{C} \}$$

is also a basis for the product topology on $X \times Y$.

### Proof
**(i)** Let $(x, y) \in X \times Y$. Since $X \times Y \in \mathcal{B}$, the firsit condition is satisfied.

If $(x, y) \in U_1 \times V_1 \cap U_2 \times V_2$ for $U_1, U_2 \in \mathcal{T}$ and $V_1, V_2 \in \mathcal{T}'$, then we have 

$$(x, y) \in U_1 \times V_1 \cap U_2 \times V_2 = (U_1 \cap U_2) \times (V_1 \cap V_2) \in \mathcal{B}$$

since $\mathcal{T}$ and $\mathcal{T}'$ are topologies. Thus $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis.

**(ii)** We will use [Theorem 3](<{% post_url Topology/2026-03-17-Basis-Of-Topology %}#theorem-3>). Let $\mathcal{T}$ be the product topology. For each $W \in \mathcal{T}$ and each $(x, y) \in W$, $\exists U \in \mathcal{T}, V \in \mathcal{T}'$ such that $(x, y) \in U \times V \subset W$ by (i). Since $\mathcal{B}$ and $\mathcal{C}$ are bases, $\exists B \in \mathcal{B}, C \in \mathcal{C}$ such that 

$$(x, y) \in B \times C \subset U \times V \subset W,$$

which means that $\mathcal{D}$ is a basis. $\blacksquare$


---

## Remark
Let $(X, \mathcal{T})$ and $(Y, \mathcal{T}')$ be topological spaces, and let $\pi_1: X \times Y \to X$ and $\pi_2: X \times Y \to Y$ be the projection maps. If $U \in \mathcal{T}$ and $V \in \mathcal{T}'$, then we have 

$$\begin{align*}
\pi_1^{-1}(U) &= U \times Y \\
\pi_2^{-1}(V) &= X \times V,
\end{align*}$$

so that 

$$\pi_1^{-1}(U) \cap \pi_2^{-1}(V) = (U \times Y) \cap (X \times V) = U \times V.$$

---

## Theorem 2
Let $(X, \mathcal{T})$ and $(Y, \mathcal{T}')$ be topological spaces. The collection

$$\mathcal{S} = \{ \pi_1^{-1}(U) \mid U \in \mathcal{T} \} \cup \{ \pi_2^{-1}(V) \mid V \in \mathcal{T}' \}$$

is a subbasis for the product topology on $X \times Y$.

### Proof
Note that $\pi^{-1}_1(X) = X \times Y$. Since $X \in \mathcal{T}$, $\pi_1^{-1}(X) \in \mathcal{S}$. Thus $X \times Y = \pi_1^{-1}(X) \subset \bigcup \mathcal{S}$. Since each $\pi_1^{-1}(U)$ and $\pi_2^{-1}(V)$ are subsets of $X \times Y$, their union $\bigcup \mathcal{S}$ is also a subset of $X \times Y$, that is, $\bigcup \mathcal{S} \subset X \times Y$. Thus $\bigcup \mathcal{S} = X \times Y$, which means that $\mathcal{S}$ is a subbasis on $X \times Y$.

Let $\mathcal{T}$ be the topology generated by $\mathcal{S}$ and let $\mathcal{T}'$ be the product topology. Note that each element of $\mathcal{S}$ is a basis element of $\mathcal{T}$. Since every basis element of $\mathcal{T}$ is also an open set of $\mathcal{T}$, we have $\mathcal{S} \subset \mathcal{T}$. By definition of topology, any finite intersections of elements of $\mathcal{S}$ are also open sets of $\mathcal{T}$. By definition of topology, any unions of open sets of $\mathcal{T}$ are also open sets of $\mathcal{T}$. Since every open set of $\mathcal{T}'$ is a union of a finite intersection of elements of $\mathcal{S}$, every open set of $\mathcal{T}'$ is also an open set of $\mathcal{T}$. Thus, $\mathcal{T}' \subset \mathcal{T}$. 

For each $U \times V$ and each $(x, y) \in U \times V$, we have 

$$(x, y) \in U \times V = \pi^{-1}_1(U) \cap \pi^{-1}_2(V) \subset U \times V,$$

which implies that $\mathcal{T} \subset \mathcal{T}'$ by [Theorem 4](<{% post_url Topology/2026-03-17-Basis-Of-Topology %}#theorem-4>). Thus $\mathcal{T} = \mathcal{T}'$, so that $\mathcal{S}$ generates the product topology. $\blacksquare$ 


---

## Example

