---
title: Power Set
date: 2026-03-27
categories: [Mathematics, Set Theory]
tags: []
math: true
---

## Definition
Let $X$ be a set. The ***power set*** of $X$, denoted by $\mathcal{P}(X)$ or $2^X$, is the set of all subsets of $X$. 

---

## Theorem 1
For a finite set $X$, there are $2^{\vert X \vert}$ different subsets. That is, $\vert 2^X \vert = 2^{\vert X \vert}$.

### Proof
Define a function $\Phi: 2^X \to \\{ 0, 1 \\}^X$ by [$\Phi(A) = \chi_A$](<{% post_url Set Theory/2026-03-27-Characteristic-Function %}>) for all $A \in 2^X$. Clearly $\Phi$ is well-defined. 

If $\Phi(A) = \Phi(B)$, then $\chi_A = \chi_B$. For each $x \in X$, we have $\chi_A(x) = \chi_B(x)$. If $x \in A$, then $\chi_A(x) = 1 = \chi_B(x)$, which means that $x \in B$. It also holds conversely, so that we have $A = B$. Thus $\Phi$ is injective. 

For any $f \in \\{ 0, 1 \\}^X$, let $A = \\{ x \in X \mid f(x) = 1 \\}$. Then clearly $A \in 2^X$. Note that for each $x \in X$, if $x \in A$, then $f(x) = 1$ and $(\Phi(A))(x) = \chi_A(x) = 1$. If $x \notin A$, then $f(x) \neq 1 \iff f(x) = 0$ and $(\Phi(A))(x) = \chi_A(x) = 0$. Thus $\Phi(A) = f$, and therefore $\Phi$ is surjective. 

Therefore, $\Phi$ is a bijection and $\vert 2^X \vert = \vert \\{ 0, 1 \\}^X \vert = 2^{\vert X \vert}$. $\blacksquare$

---

## Theorem 2
For a finite set $X$, there are $2^{\vert X \vert - 1}$ subsets of $X$ of odd size or containing a fixed element $x_0 \in X$.

### Proof
Let $X_o$ be the set of all subsets of $X$ of odd size and $X' := X \setminus \\{ x_0 \\}$.

Define a function $\Psi: 2^{X'} \to 2^X$ by

$$\Psi(A) = \begin{cases} 
A \cup \{ x_0 \} & \text{if } \vert A \vert \text{ is even} \\ 
A & \text{if } \vert A \vert \text{ is odd} 
\end{cases}$$

Clearly $\Psi$ is well-defined. If $\vert A \vert$ is even, then $\vert \Psi(A) \vert = \vert A \cup \\{ x_0 \\} \vert$ is odd. If $\vert A \vert$ is odd, then clearly $\vert \Psi(A) \vert = \vert A \vert$ is odd. Thus, $\Psi$ actually maps $2^{X'}$ to $X_o$. 

Define $\Phi: X_o \to 2^{X'}$ by 

$$\Phi(S) = \begin{cases} 
S \setminus \{ x_0 \} & \text{if } x_0 \in S \\ 
S & \text{if } x_0 \notin S 
\end{cases}$$

Clearly $\Phi$ is well-defined. Note that for each $S \in X_o$, if $x_0 \in S$, then 

$$(\Psi \circ \Phi)(S) = \Psi(\Phi(S)) = \Psi(S \setminus \{ x_0 \}) = S$$

because $\vert S \vert$ is odd, so that $\vert S \setminus \\{ x_0 \\} \vert = \vert S \vert - 1$ is even. 

If $x_0 \notin S$, then

$$(\Psi \circ \Phi)(S) = \Psi(\Phi(S)) = \Psi(S) = S.$$ 

Thus $\Psi \circ \Phi = \mathrm{id}_{X_o}$. 

Conversely, for each $A \in 2^{X'}$, if $\vert A \vert$ is even, then we have

$$(\Phi \circ \Psi)(A) = \Phi(\Psi(A)) = \Phi(A \cup \{ x_0 \}) = (A \cup \{ x_0 \}) \setminus \{ x_0 \} = A.$$

If $\vert A \vert$ is odd, then we have

$$(\Phi \circ \Psi)(A) = \Phi(\Psi(A)) = \Phi(A) = A.$$

Thus $\Phi \circ \Psi = \mathrm{id}_{2^{X'}}$. 

Therefore, $\Psi$ is a bijection and $\vert X_o \vert = \vert 2^{X'} \vert = 2^{\vert X' \vert} = 2^{\vert X \vert - 1}$. $\blacksquare$